README.md, before:

## Name
ASL translator tool

## Description
The ASL translator is an advanced technological tool that leverages deep learning and computer vision techniques by using a camera to detect ASL gestures, including movements of hands, head, and facial expression, and translating them to written text, either in real-time, or based on a pre-recorded video file.
At the same time, the ASL translator provides a restricted access section, accessible only using administrator credentials, which is used to manage the translation model. In this section, the site administrators can see data about existing trained models (i.e. date of training, and train and test accuracy), can select which model is currency active, and have the ability to train a new model by providing additional data points.
This tool is designed to facilitate communication for individuals who are hard of hearing with others who are not familiar with sign language. We use an LSTM deep learning model for designing this tool and the model is trained with [MS-ASL Dataset](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=100121). 

## Tech stack
- [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/)
- [Tensorflow](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- [Scikit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org)
- [Numpy](https://numpy.org/)
- [OpenCV](https://opencv.org/)
- [Yt-dlp](https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
- [Mediapipe](https://developers.google.com/mediapipe)
- [Ffmpeg](https://pypi.org/project/python-ffmpeg/)


## Dataset

We are utilizing the [MS-ASL Dataset](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=100121) dataset as our data source, which comprises three JSON files containing training, validation, and test sets. The sizes of these sets are 16054, 5287, and 4172, respectively. However, we have discovered that only roughly 70% of the data set is usable, due to a number of the source videos being made private.
The dataset also includes a comprehensive list of classes representing the words to be identified. Furthermore, a list of synonyms is provided, to enable the model to consider alternative words with similar meanings. Each data point is in the format shown below:

{"org_text": "nice", "clean_text": "nice", "start_time": 0.0, "signer_id": 38, "signer": 52, "start": 0, "end": 92, "file": "nice in American Sign Language", "label": 1, "height": 270.0, "fps": 29.917, "end_time": 3.075, "url": "www.youtube.com/watch?v=3aXS3keR8oY", "text": "nice", "box": [0.013679355382919312, 0.18594351410865784, 1.0, 0.7082176208496094], "width": 480.0}

As shown, each data point comes with a URL to a video of a person performing the corresponding sign. Other data such as the length, start time, end time, bounding boxes, etc. are also provided.


## Usage
Use examples liberally, and show the expected output if you can. It's helpful to have inline the smallest example of usage that you can demonstrate, while providing links to more sophisticated examples if they are too long to reasonably include in the README.

## Visuals
Depending on what you are making, it can be a good idea to include screenshots or even a video (you'll frequently see GIFs rather than actual videos). Tools like ttygif can help, but check out Asciinema for a more sophisticated method.

## Diagrams

## Installation guide

### Local run
In order to locally run the application, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository into your local computer
2. Open the directory in your desired IDE 
3. Navigate to the "main" branch
```
git checkout main
```
4. navigate to the project directory 
```
cd asl_translator_gui
```
5. create a shell
```
pipenv shell
```
6. install the dependencies
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
7. run the application
```
python manage.py runserver
```
## Deployment

The application is deployed on Kubernetes engine on Google cloud. To access the website follow this link: http://34.140.181.224:80

The admin account credentials:
- Usename: admin
- Password: winter2024

In case by the time you are testing this, the website is down for running out of free credits we have from Google cloud, [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MaJpswi22UE) we provide you a video of the website deployed so that you can see the functionality. Note that the website is on a HTTP protocol, is not considered safe for your browser. Hence, the the browser will not allow you to use your camera and consequently not the live translation functionality. However, these workarounds might work on allowing the website to use your camera. The instructions below are provided only for Google Chrome browser:
1. Go to: chrome://flags/#unsafely-treat-insecure-origin-as-secure
2. Enable Insecure origins treated as secure
3. Add the addresses for which you want to ignore this policy: http://34.140.181.224/live/
4. Restart chrome

For that the following steps have been taken. Note that the required files and correct project structure is in "cloud-deployment" branch.

### Docker image
1. navigate to the project directory 
```
cd asl_translator_gui
```
2. login to docker hub
```
docker login
```
3. build the docker image
```
docker build -t asl-translation-app:01 .
```
4. tag the build image 
```
docker tag asl-translation-app:01 [username]/[desired name and tag]
```
5. push the image to the hub
```
docker push [username]/[desired name and tag chosen]
```

### Connecting to Kubernetes cluster
1. Make a Kubernetes cluster in your Google cloud account
2. Install Kubectl:
- Follow this link: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/

3. Install Google cloud SDK:
- Follow this link: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install

4. Initialize gcloud:
```
gcloud init
```

5. Get Kubectl credintials for the project:
```
gcloud container clusters get-credentials [the name of the cluster] --location=[the location of the cluster]
```
6. Install any required plugins

7. Deploy the app:
```
kubectl apply -f polls.yaml
```

## Project developers
- Yasamin Fazelidehkordi @yasaminf
- Emma Litvin @litvin
- Patrik Samcenko @samcenko
- Amin Mahmoudifard @aminmah

For a detailed breakdown of our contributions, visit our [wiki](https://git.chalmers.se/courses/dit826/2023/group2/ASL-translator/-/wikis/Group-Responsibilities) pages.
## License
[MIT license](https://git.chalmers.se/courses/dit826/2023/group2/ASL-translator/-/blob/cloud-deployment/LICENSE)

Commit message:

Add imaged to README - Retraining workflow - Translation workflow - Database schema

README.md, after:

## Project name
**ASL Translator tool**

## Description
The **ASL Translator** is an advanced technological tool that leverages deep learning and computer vision techniques by using a camera to detect ASL gestures, including movements of hands, head, and facial expression, and translating them to written text, either in real-time, or based on a pre-recorded video file.<br>
At the same time, the ASL translator provides a restricted access section, accessible only using administrator credentials, which is used to manage the translation model. In this section, the site administrators can see data about existing trained models (i.e. date of training, and train and test accuracy), can select which model is currency active, and have the ability to train a new model by providing additional data points. <br>
This tool is designed to facilitate communication for individuals who are hard of hearing with others who are not familiar with sign language. We use an LSTM deep learning model for designing this tool and the model is trained with [MS-ASL Dataset](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=100121). 

## Tech stack
- [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/)
- [Tensorflow](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- [Scikit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org)
- [Numpy](https://numpy.org/)
- [OpenCV](https://opencv.org/)
- [Yt-dlp](https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp)
- [Matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)
- [Mediapipe](https://developers.google.com/mediapipe)
- [Ffmpeg](https://pypi.org/project/python-ffmpeg/)
- [Jsonschema](https://python-jsonschema.readthedocs.io/en/latest/validate/)


## Dataset
We are utilizing the [MS-ASL Dataset](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=100121) dataset as our data source, which comprises three JSON files containing training, validation, and test sets. The sizes of these sets are 16054, 5287, and 4172, respectively. However, we have discovered that only roughly 70% of the data set is usable, due to a number of the source videos being made private.
The dataset also includes a comprehensive list of classes representing the words to be identified. Furthermore, a list of synonyms is provided, to enable the model to consider alternative words with similar meanings. Each data point is in the format shown below:

{"org_text": "nice", "clean_text": "nice", "start_time": 0.0, "signer_id": 38, "signer": 52, "start": 0, "end": 92, "file": "nice in American Sign Language", "label": 1, "height": 270.0, "fps": 29.917, "end_time": 3.075, "url": "www.youtube.com/watch?v=3aXS3keR8oY", "text": "nice", "box": [0.013679355382919312, 0.18594351410865784, 1.0, 0.7082176208496094], "width": 480.0}

As shown, each data point comes with a URL to a video of a person performing the corresponding sign. Other data such as the length, start time, end time, bounding boxes, etc. are also provided.


## Interactions with the system
### Retraining workflow
![Retraining workflow](/img/retraining_flow.png)

### Translation workflow
![Translation workflow](/img/translation_flow.png)

## Database schema
![Database schema](/img/db_schema.png)

## Installation guide

### Local run
In order to locally run the application, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository into your local computer
2. Open the directory in your desired IDE 
3. Navigate to the "main" branch
```
git checkout main
```
4. navigate to the project directory 
```
cd asl_translator_gui
```
5. create a shell
```
pipenv shell
```
6. install the dependencies
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
7. run the application
```
python manage.py runserver
```
## Deployment

The application is deployed on Kubernetes engine on Google cloud. To access the website follow this link: http://34.140.181.224:80

The **admin account** credentials:
- <ins>Usename:</ins> admin
- <ins>Password:</ins> winter2024

In case by the time you are testing this, the website is down for running out of free credits we have from Google cloud, [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MaJpswi22UE) we provide you a video of the website deployed so that you can see the functionality. Note that the website is on a HTTP protocol, is not considered safe for your browser. Hence, the the browser will not allow you to use your camera and consequently not the live translation functionality. However, these workarounds might work on allowing the website to use your camera. The instructions below are provided <ins>only</ins> for Google Chrome browser:
1. Go to: **chrome://flags/#unsafely-treat-insecure-origin-as-secure**
2. Enable Insecure origins treated as secure
3. Add the addresses for which you want to ignore this policy: http://34.140.181.224/live/
4. Restart Chrome

For that the following steps have been taken. Note that the required files and correct project structure is in "cloud-deployment" branch.

### Docker image
1. navigate to the project directory 
```
cd asl_translator_gui
```
2. login to docker hub
```
docker login
```
3. build the docker image
```
docker build -t asl-translation-app:01 .
```
4. tag the build image 
```
docker tag asl-translation-app:01 [username]/[desired name and tag]
```
5. push the image to the hub
```
docker push [username]/[desired name and tag chosen]
```

### Connecting to Kubernetes cluster
1. Make a Kubernetes cluster in your Google cloud account
2. Install Kubectl:
- Follow this link: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/

3. Install Google cloud SDK:
- Follow this link: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install

4. Initialize gcloud:
```
gcloud init
```

5. Get Kubectl credintials for the project:
```
gcloud container clusters get-credentials [the name of the cluster] --location=[the location of the cluster]
```
6. Install any required plugins

7. Deploy the app:
```
kubectl apply -f polls.yaml
```

## Project developers
- Yasamin Fazelidehkordi @yasaminf
- Emma Litvin @litvin
- Patrik Samcenko @samcenko
- Amin Mahmoudifard @aminmah

For a detailed breakdown of our contributions, visit this [wiki](https://git.chalmers.se/courses/dit826/2023/group2/ASL-translator/-/wikis/Group-Responsibilities) page.

## License
[MIT license](https://git.chalmers.se/courses/dit826/2023/group2/ASL-translator/-/blob/cloud-deployment/LICENSE)
